Pipeline/Pipeline.md, before:

# Pipeline

> *"I’ll just run these steps manually this one time..." — last words before three weeks of debugging filenames.*


Today, we’ll learn how to build and manage pipelines using **SLURM** and **Nextflow**

---

## Resource

🔗 [Nextflow](https://training.nextflow.io/latest/hello_nextflow/)

---

## SLURM Pipeline

How could one add a differential expression analysis (DESeq2) step to the `rnaseq_pipeline_array_depend.sh` script such that DESeq2 runs only after all `salmon` jobs for all samples have completed?
*(No code required - describe conceptually)*

---

## Nextflow Pipeline

In the current `rnaseq_nf` pipeline, we assume that the **transcriptome index** has already been created via `salmon index`.  However, this may not always be the case.

Add a `SALMON_INDEX` process that:

- Takes a reference transcriptome FASTA file as input (specify `transcriptome` in `params.yaml` file with `/farmshare/home/classes/bios/270/data/ecoli_ref/GCF_000401755.1_Escherichia_coli_ATCC_25922_cds_from_genomic.fna`)
- Outputs a Salmon index directory, used as input for the downstream `SALMON` process

Command for indexing a reference transcriptome:

```bash
salmon index -t <transcriptome.fa> -i <output_index_dir>
```

Modify your pipeline such that:

1. If the user provides `index` in `params.yaml`, use `index` directly as input for `SALMON` process, skip `SALMON_INDEX`.  
2. If `index` is **not provided**, but `transcriptome` is, run `SALMON_INDEX` to build index and used the output index directory as input to `SALMON`.  
3. If **neither** parameter is provided, exit with an informative error message.

---

## Instruction on running Nextflow Pipeline

1. Modify singularity setup in `rnaseq_nf/configs/nextflow.config`


```bash
singularity {
	  enabled = true
	  autoMounts = true
    runOptions = "-B /farmshare/user_data/khoang99/bios270" # modify this to your $SCRATCH directory
    cacheDir = '/farmshare/user_data/khoang99/bios270/repos/BIOS270-AU25/Pipeline/rnaseq_nf/envs/containers' # modify this to where you want to store container cache image
}
```

2. Modify output directory path in `rnaseq_nf/configs/params.yaml`

```bash
samplesheet: "/farmshare/home/classes/bios/270/data/samplesheet.csv"
index: '/farmshare/home/classes/bios/270/data/indexes/ecoli_transcripts_index'
outdir: '/farmshare/user_data/khoang99/bios270/data/processed_data/SRP628437_nf' # modify to where you want the output to be
run_deseq: true

```

3. Make sure scripts in `rnaseq_nf/bin` are executable, if not 

```bash
# cd to ./Pipeline
chmod +x ./rnaseq_nf/bin/*
```

4. Run Nextflow

Make sure the `nextflow` binary you downloaded in `Setup.md` was added to $PATH

In a `tmux` session, run 
```bash
# cd rnaseq_nf
nextflow run rnaseq.nf -params-file configs/params.yaml -c configs/nextflow.config -profile slurm -resume
```

Commit message:

recovered progress after farmshare memory maxing and finalized writeup4

Pipeline/Pipeline.md, after:

# Pipeline

Running this ended up filling up all the space in my dir such that I was unable to even write temporary vim files or save any updates. I had to pull the repo onto my laptop and update based on my memory. I must have made a mistake in where the trimmed files should go but you need to fix this in future years such that students don't waste so much time.

---

## Resource

🔗 [Nextflow](https://training.nextflow.io/latest/hello_nextflow/)

---

## SLURM Pipeline

How could one add a differential expression analysis (DESeq2) step to the `rnaseq_pipeline_array_depend.sh` script such that DESeq2 runs only after all `salmon` jobs for all samples have completed?
*(No code required - describe conceptually)*

I previously wrote a better version of this that I couldn't recover because I didn't push my update early enough.
I would make an array of the jobs being run in salmon, make those into a colon separated list, then have that as a dependency that all those are complete when the deseq2 run outside of the main loop gets called.

---

## Nextflow Pipeline

In the current `rnaseq_nf` pipeline, we assume that the **transcriptome index** has already been created via `salmon index`.  However, this may not always be the case.

Add a `SALMON_INDEX` process that:

- Takes a reference transcriptome FASTA file as input (specify `transcriptome` in `params.yaml` file with `/farmshare/home/classes/bios/270/data/ecoli_ref/GCF_000401755.1_Escherichia_coli_ATCC_25922_cds_from_genomic.fna`)
- Outputs a Salmon index directory, used as input for the downstream `SALMON` process

Command for indexing a reference transcriptome:

```bash
salmon index -t <transcriptome.fa> -i <output_index_dir>
```

Modify your pipeline such that:

1. If the user provides `index` in `params.yaml`, use `index` directly as input for `SALMON` process, skip `SALMON_INDEX`.  
2. If `index` is **not provided**, but `transcriptome` is, run `SALMON_INDEX` to build index and used the output index directory as input to `SALMON`.  
3. If **neither** parameter is provided, exit with an informative error message.

done

---

## Instruction on running Nextflow Pipeline

1. Modify singularity setup in `rnaseq_nf/configs/nextflow.config`


```bash
singularity {
	  enabled = true
	  autoMounts = true
    runOptions = "-B /farmshare/user_data/khoang99/bios270" # modify this to your $SCRATCH directory
    cacheDir = '/farmshare/user_data/khoang99/bios270/repos/BIOS270-AU25/Pipeline/rnaseq_nf/envs/containers' # modify this to where you want to store container cache image
}
```

2. Modify output directory path in `rnaseq_nf/configs/params.yaml`

```bash
samplesheet: "/farmshare/home/classes/bios/270/data/samplesheet.csv"
index: '/farmshare/home/classes/bios/270/data/indexes/ecoli_transcripts_index'
outdir: '/farmshare/user_data/khoang99/bios270/data/processed_data/SRP628437_nf' # modify to where you want the output to be
run_deseq: true

```

3. Make sure scripts in `rnaseq_nf/bin` are executable, if not 

```bash
# cd to ./Pipeline
chmod +x ./rnaseq_nf/bin/*
```

4. Run Nextflow

Make sure the `nextflow` binary you downloaded in `Setup.md` was added to $PATH

In a `tmux` session, run 
```bash
# cd rnaseq_nf
nextflow run rnaseq.nf -params-file configs/params.yaml -c configs/nextflow.config -profile slurm -resume
```
